About The Authors
==================

Larry Peterson and Bruce Davie have been collaborating on systems
projects and writing networking textbooks since the 1990s. Their
book *Computer Networks: A Systems Approach*, a staple of networking
curricula for the last 30 years, is now in its sixth edition. That
introductory textbook, along with several new books focused on
emerging topics in network and cloud systems, are available as open
source at https://systemsapproach.org.

Larry spent most of his career in academia, first at the University of
Arizona and later at Princeton University, where he was the
Robert E. Kahn Professor of Computer Science. While at Princeton he
directed the PlanetLab Consortium, building a global testbed for
research on Internet-scale services. A CDN startup he helped spin out
of PlanetLab was acquired by Akamai in 2010. In 2013 Larry
transitioned to Emeritus status at Princeton and joined the Open
Networking Lab (now the Open Networking Foundation) where he served as
CTO, leading the design of open source platforms for Software-Defined
Networking (SDN) and edge cloud computing. He currently chairs the
Technical Steering Team for Aether, a Private 5G Project of the Linux
Foundation. He is a member of the National Academy of Engineering, a
Fellow of the ACM and the IEEE, the 2010 recipient of the IEEE
Kobayashi Computer and Communication Award, and the 2013 recipient of
the ACM SIGCOMM Award. He currently lives in Tucson Arizona.

Bruce began his networking career at Bellcore where he worked on the
Aurora Gigabit testbed, which led to his first collaboration with
Larry on high-speed host-network interfaces. He then went to Cisco
where he led a team of architects responsible for Multiprotocol Label
Switching (MPLS). He worked extensively at the IETF on standardizing
MPLS and various quality of service technologies. Bruce also spent five
years as a visiting lecturer at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. In 2012 he joined Software Defined Networking (SDN)
startup Nicira as a lead architect and was then a principal engineer
at VMware following the acquisition of Nicira. In 2017 he took on the
role of VP and CTO for the Asia Pacific region at VMware, which gave
him the opportunity to return to Australia. He is a Fellow of the ACM
and chaired ACM SIGCOMM from 2009 to 2013. He received the ACM SIGCOMM
award in 2025.
